So the small Scandinavian nations have given to the world famous men of
science, from Linnaeus downward; poets like Tegnor and Bj√∂rnson;
scholars like Madvig; dauntless explorers like Fridtjof Nansen.

England had in the age of Shakespeare, Bacon, and Milton a population
little larger than that of Bulgaria today. The United States in the days
of Washington and Franklin and Jefferson and Hamilton and Marshall
counted fewer inhabitants than Denmark or Greece. In the most brilliant
generations of German literature and thought, the age of Kant and
Lessing and Goethe, of Hegel and Schiller and Fichte, there was no real
German State at all, but a congeries of principalities and free
cities--independent centres of intellectual life in which letters and
science produced a richer crop than the two succeeding generations have
raised, just as Great Britain also, with eight times the population of
the year 1600, has had no more Shakespeares or Miltons.

Culture Decayed in Imperial Rome.

No fiction is more palpably contradicted by history than that relied on
by the school to which von Bernhardi belongs--that culture, literary,
scientific, and artistic, flourishes best in great military States. The
decay of art and literature in the Roman world began just when Rome's
military power had made that world one great and ordered State. The
opposite view would be much nearer the truth, though one must admit that
no general theory regarding the relations of art and letters to
Governments and political conditions has ever yet been proved to be
sound.

     [_Note--Gen. von Bernhardi's knowledge of current history may be
     estimated by the fact that he assumes_ (1) _that trade rivalry
     makes war probable between Great Britain and the United States;_
     (2) _that he believes that the Indian princes and peoples are
     likely to revolt against Great Britain should she be involved in
     war, and_ (3) _that he expects her self-governing colonies to take
     such an opportunity of severing their connection with her._]

The world is already too uniform and is becoming more uniform every day.
A few leading languages, a few forms of civilization, a few types of
character, are spreading out from the seven or eight greatest States and
extinguishing weaker languages, forms, and types. Although great States
are stronger and more populous, their peoples are not necessarily more
gifted, and the extinction of the minor languages and types would be a
misfortune for the world's future development.

We may not be able to arrest the forces which seem to be making for that
extinction, but we certainly ought not strengthen them. Rather we ought
to maintain and defend the smaller States and to favor the rise and
growth of new peoples. Not merely because they were delivered from the
tyranny of Sultans like Abdul Hamid did the intellect of Europe welcome
the successively won liberations of Greece, Servia, Bulgaria, and
Montenegro; it was also in the hope that those countries would in time
develop out of their present crude conditions new types of culture, new
centres of productive intellectual life.

Gen. von Bernhardi invokes history as the ultimate court of appeal. He
appeals to Caesar; to Caesar let him go. "Die Weltgeschichte ist das
Weltgericht", ("World history is world tribunal.") History declares that
no nation, however great, is entitled to try to impose its type of
civilization on others. No race, not even the Teutonic or Anglo-Saxon,
is entitled to claim the leadership of humanity. Each people has in its
time contributed something that was distinctively its own, and the world
is far richer thereby than if any one race, however gifted, had
established its permanent ascendency.

We of the Anglo-Saxon race do not claim for ourselves, any more than we
admit in others, any right to dominate by force or to impose our own
type of civilization on less powerful races. Perhaps we have not that
assured conviction of its superiority which the school of von Bernhardi
expressed for the Teutons of North Germany. We know how much we owe,
even within our own islands, to the Celtic race; and, though we must
admit that peoples of Anglo-Saxon stock have, like others, made some
mistakes and sometimes abused their strength, let it be remembered what
have been the latest acts they have done abroad.

Praises American Altruism.

The United States have twice withdrawn their troops from Cuba, which
they could easily have retained; they have resisted all temptations to
annex any part of the territories of Mexico, in which the lives and
property of their citizens were for three years in constant danger. So
Great Britain also six years ago restored the amplest self-government to
two South African republics, having already agreed to the maintenance on
equal terms of the Dutch language; and the citizens of those republics,
which were in arms against her thirteen years ago, have now
spontaneously come forward to support her by arms under the gallant
leader who then commanded the Boers; and I may add that one reason why
the Princes of India have rallied so promptly and heartily to Great
Britain in this war is because for many years past we have avoided
annexing the territories of those Princes, allowing them to adopt heirs
when the successors of their own families failed, and leaving to them as
much as possible of the ordinary functions of government.

Service the Test of Greatness.

It is only vulgar minds that mistake bigness for greatness; for
greatness is of the soul, not of the body. In the judgment which history
will hereafter pass upon the forty centuries of recorded progress toward
civilization that now lie behind us, what are the tests it will apply to
determine the true greatness of a people? Not population, not territory,
not wealth, not military power; rather will history ask what examples of
lofty character and unselfish devotion to honor and duty has a people
given? What has it done to increase the volume of knowledge? What
thoughts and what ideals of permanent value and unexhausted fertility
has it bequeathed to mankind? What works has it produced in poetry,
music, and other arts to be an unfailing source of enjoyment to
posterity? The small peoples need not fear the application of such
tests.

The world advances, not, as the Bernhardi school supposes, only or even
mainly by fighting; it advances mainly by thinking and by the process of
reciprocal teaching and learning; by the continuous and unconscious
co-operation of all its strongest and finest minds. Each race--Hellenic,
Italic, Celtic, Teutonic, Iberian, Slavonic--has something to give, each
something to learn; and when their blood is blended the mixed stock may
combine gifts of both. Most progressive races have been those who
combined willingness to learn with strength, which enabled them to
receive without loss to their own quality, retaining their primal vigor,
but entering into the labors of others, as the Teutons who settled
within the dominions of Rome profited by the lessons of the old
civilization.

Let me disclaim once more before I close, any intention to attribute to
the German people the principles set forth by the school of Treitschke
and Bernhardi--the school which teaches hatred of peace and
arbitration, disregard of treaty obligations, scorn for weaker peoples.
We in England would feel even deeper sadness than weighs upon us now if
we could suppose that such principles had been embraced by the nation
whose thinkers have done so much for human progress and who have
produced so many shining examples of Christian saintliness; but when
those principles have been ostentatiously proclaimed, when a peaceful
neutral country which the other belligerent had solemnly and repeatedly
undertaken to respect has been invaded and treated as Belgium has been
treated, and when attempts are made to justify these deeds as incidental
to a campaign for civilization and culture, it becomes necessary to
point out how untrue and how pernicious such principles are.

Most Wars Needless and Unjust.

What are the teachings of history to which Gen. Bernhardi is fond of
appealing? That war has been the constant handmaid of tyranny and the
source of more than half the miseries of man; that, although some wars
have been necessary and have given occasion for a display of splendid
heroism--wars of defense against aggression or to succor the
oppressed--most wars have been needless or unjust; that the mark of an
advancing civilization has been the substitution of friendship for
hatred and of peaceful for warlike ideals; that small peoples have done
and can do as much for the common good of humanity as large peoples;
that treaties must be observed, (for what are they but records of
national faith, solemnly pledged, and what could bring mankind more
surely and swiftly back to that reign of violence and terror from which
it has been slowly rising for the last ten centuries than the
destruction of trust in the plighted faith of nations?)

No event has brought out that essential unity which now exists in the
world so forcibly as this war has done, for no event has ever so
affected every part of the world. Four continents are involved, the
whole of the Old World, and the New World suffers grievously in its
trade, industry, and finances. Thus the whole world is interested in
preventing the recurrence of such a calamity and there is a general
feeling throughout the world that the causes which have brought it upon
us must be removed.

We are told that armaments must be reduced; that the baleful spirit of
militarism must be quenched; that peoples must everywhere be admitted to
a fuller share in the control of foreign policy; that efforts must be
made to establish a sort of league of concord--some system of
international relations and reciprocal peace alliances by which weaker
nations may be protected and under which differences between nations may
be adjusted by courts of arbitration and conciliation of wider scope
than those that now exist.

All these things are desirable, but no scheme for preventing future wars
will have any chance of success unless it rests upon the assurance that
the States which enter into it will loyally and steadfastly abide by it,
and that each and all of them will join in coercing by their
overwhelming united strength any State which may disregard obligations
it has undertaken. The faith of treaties is the only solid foundation on
which the temple of peace can be built up.

JAMES BRYCE.


       *       *       *       *       *




Entrance of France Into War




       *       *       *       *       *




By President Poincare and Premier Viviani.

     Proclamation Issued to the People of France by President Poincare,
     Paris, Aug. 1.


     For some days the condition of Europe has become considerably more
     serious in spite of the efforts of diplomacy. The horizon has
     become darkened.

     At this hour most of the nations have mobilized their forces.

     Some countries, even though protected by neutrality, have thought
     it right to take this step as a precaution.

     Some powers, whose constitutional and military laws do not resemble
     our own, have without issuing a decree of mobilization begun and
     continued preparations which are in reality equivalent to
     mobilization and which are nothing more or less than an
     anticipation of it _(qui n'en sont que l'ex√©cution anticip√©e_).

     France, who has always declared her pacific intentions, and who has
     at the darkest hours (_dans des heures tragiques_) given to Europe
     counsels of moderation and a living example of prudence
     (_sagesse_), who has multiplied her efforts for the maintenance of
     the world's peace, has herself prepared for all eventualties and
     has taken from this moment the first indispensable measures for the
     safety of her territory.

     But our legislation does not allow us to complete these
     preparations without a decree of mobilization.

     Careful of its responsibility and realizing that it would be
     failing in a sacred task to leave things as they were, the
     Government has issued the decree which the situation demands.

     Mobilization is not war. In the present circumstances it appears,
     on the contrary, to be the best means of assuring peace with honor.

     Strong in its ardent desire to arrive at a peaceful solution of the
     crisis the Government, protected by such precautions as are
     necessary, will continue its diplomatic efforts, and it still hopes
     to succeed.

     It relies upon the calm of this noble nation not to give rein to
     emotions which are not justified. It relies upon the patriotism of
     all Frenchmen, and it knows that there is not one who is not ready
     to do his duty.

     At this moment parties no longer exist; there remains only France,
     the eternal, the pacific, the resolute. There remains only the
     fatherland of right and of justice, entirely united in calm
     vigilance and dignity.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: RENE VIVIANI,
French Premier.
(_Photograph from Bain News Service._)]




NEUTRALIZED STATE RESPECTED.

Telegram from M. Viviani, French Premier and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to the Ministry in Luxembourg, Published Aug. 3.

Please declare to the President of the Council that, in accordance with
the Treaty of London of 1867, the Government of the Republic intended to
respect the neutrality of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, as it has shown
by its attitude. The violation of this neutrality by Germany is,
however, of a nature which compels France to take henceforth the
measures in this respect required by her defense and interests.

The Prime Minister of Luxembourg has protested to the German Government,
and has brought this protest to the notice of the German Embassy in
Paris, stating the following facts:

     On Sunday, Aug. 2, early in the morning, the Germans entered
     Luxembourg territory by the bridges of Wasserbourg(?) and Remleh,
     proceeding toward the south of the country and Luxembourg, its
     capital. They have also brought toward this point armored trains,
     with troops and munitions of war. Further, the special French
     Commissioner at Petitcroix has announced to the S√ªret√© G√©n√©rale
     that the Germans have just opened fire on the frontier station of
     Delle-Petitcroix. Two German cavalry officers have just been killed
     at Roncray and Boxson, ten kilometers on our side of the frontier.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE NATION IN ARMS.

     Address to the French Parliament by President Poincare, Aug. 4.

     Our nation is in arms and trembling with eagerness to defend the
     land of our fathers.

     France is faithfully supported by her ally, Russia. She is upheld
     by the loyal friendship of England, and, already, from all points
     of the civilized world, go out to her expressions of sympathy and
     good-will, for she represents today, once again before the
     universe, liberty, justice, and reason.

     Lift up your hearts! Long live France!


       *       *       *       *       *




POSITION OF THE REPUBLIC.

Address of Premier Viviani to the French Senate and House of Deputies,
Aug. 4.

_This speech has been called by M. Jusserand, French Ambassador to the
United States, "the chief document printed up to now [Nov. 1] in
which the French situation, with reference to the present war, has been
expounded._"


Gentlemen, the German Ambassador left Paris yesterday, after having
notified us of the existence of a state of war.

The Government is in duty bound to give Parliament a truthful recital of
the events which, within less than ten days, have brought about war in
Europe and obliged France, peaceful and strong, to defend her frontier
against an attack the premeditated suddenness of which emphasizes its
odious injustice.

This attack, entirely inexcusable and begun before any declaration of
war notified us of it, is the last act in a plan whose origin and aim I
intend to lay bare before our republic and before civilized public
opinion.

After the abominable crime which cost the lives of the heir to the
Austro-Hungarian throne and of the Duchess of Hohenberg, trouble arose
between the Governments of Vienna and Belgrade.

Most of the great powers were not informed of this except
semi-officially up to Friday, the 24th day of July, on which day the
Ambassadors of Austria-Hungary sent them a circular note, which has been
published in the newspapers.

The object of this note was to explain and justify an ultimatum sent the
evening before to Servia, through the Austrian Minister at Belgrade.

This ultimatum asserted that a number of Servian subjects and
associations were implicated in the crime of Serajevo, and implied that
members of the Servian Government themselves were not without
complicity in it. It demanded a reply from Servia, giving Saturday,
July 25, at 6 in the evening, as the time limit.

Austria Amazes Allies.

The reparations demanded, or, at least, some among them, unquestionably
were derogatory to the rights of a sovereign nation. But in spite of
their extreme character Servia, on July 25, declared that she submitted
to them almost without a reservation of any sort.

The advice transmitted by France, Russia, and Great Britain from the
very first to Belgrade was not without its effect in bringing about this
submission, which was a success for Austria-Hungary and likewise a
guarantee toward the maintenance of European peace.

This advice was all the more valuable in view of the fact that
Austria-Hungary's demands had been inadequately foreshadowed to the
Governments of the Triple Entente, to whom, during the three preceding
weeks, the Austro-Hungarian Government had repeatedly given assurances
that its demands would be extremely moderate.

It was, therefore, with justified astonishment that the Cabinets of
Paris, St. Petersburg, and London heard, on July 26, that the Austrian
Minister at Belgrade, after an examination lasting only a few minutes,
had declared the Servian reply unacceptable and broken off diplomatic
relations.

Germany the Stumbling Block.

This astonishment was rendered greater by the fact that, on Friday, the
21st, the German Ambassador had visited the French Minister of Foreign
Affairs for the purpose of reading to him a note to the effect that the
Austro-Servian dispute should be localized and not made the subject of
intervention by the great powers, and that, unless such were the case,
"incalculable consequences" were to be feared. Like action was taken on
Saturday, the 25th, at London and St. Petersburg.

Is it necessary, gentlemen, to point out to you the difference between
the menacing methods employed by the German Ambassador at Paris and the
conciliatory sentiments of which the powers of the Triple Entente had
just given proof by their advice to Servia to submit?

Nevertheless, passing over the abnormal character of the German action,
we, in conjunction with our allies and friends, immediately instituted
measures of conciliation and invited Germany to take part in them.

From the very first we were chagrined to find that our acts and efforts
found no echo at Berlin.

Not only did Germany seem unwilling to give Austria-Hungary the amicable
advice which her situation authorized her to give, but, from that very
time and even more in the ensuing days, she seemed to place herself
between the Vienna Cabinet and the propositions of a compromise
emanating from the other powers.

On Tuesday, July 28, Austria-Hungary declared war on Servia. This
declaration of war, complicating forty-eight hours after the situation
brought about by the rupture of diplomatic relations, lent color to the
assumption that there had been a premeditated plan to make war, a
systematic programme for the subjugation of Servia.

Thus not only the independence of a brave nation became involved, but
also the balance of power in the Balkans, set forth in the Treaty of
Bucharest of 1913, and sanctioned by the moral adhesion of all the great
powers.

Notwithstanding, at the suggestion of the British Government, always
interested in the most steadfast manner in the maintenance of European
peace, the negotiations continued, or, to be more exact, the powers
constituting the Triple Entente tried to continue them.

To their common desire was due the proposition for quadruple action,
viz., by England, France, Germany, and Italy, with the object of
assuring to Austria all legitimate reparation and bringing about an
equitable arrangement of the difficulty. On Wednesday, the 29th, the
Russian Government, noting the persistent blocking of these attempts,
Austria's mobilization and her declaration of war, and fearing that
Servia would be crushed by military force, decided, as a preventive
measure, to mobilize her troops in four military zones, namely, only
those stationed along the Austro-Hungarian frontier.

In doing this it took care to notify the German Government that this
step, limited in character and not constituting an offensive move
against Austria, was not in any way directed against Germany.

In a conversation with the Russian Ambassador at Berlin the German
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs showed no objection to
recognizing this.

Germany Becomes Warlike.

On the other hand, all the attempts of Great Britain, backed by Russia
and with the support of France, for establishing contact between Austria
and Servia under the moral auspices of Europe, was met in Berlin by a
premeditated negative attitude, the existence of which is absolutely
proved by the diplomatic communications.

This made a troublous state of affairs which pointed to the existence at
Berlin of certain mental reservations. A few hours later these
suppositions and fears were destined to be changed into certainties.




"REVOLUTION!"

Cry Raised by Jean Jaur√®s at Session of International Socialist Bureau,
Brussels, July 29.

The diplomats negotiate. It seems that they will be satisfied to take
from Servia a little of its blood. We have, therefore, a little rest to
insure peace. But to what lesson is Europe submitted? When after twenty
centuries of Christianity, when after 100 years of the triumph of the
principles of the rights of men, how is it possible that millions of
persons, without knowing why, can kill each other?

And Germany? If she knew of the Austrian note, it is inexcusable to have
permitted such a step. And if she did not know of this Austrian note,
what is her Governmental wisdom? You have an agreement which drags you
into war and you do not know what you have been dragged for? I ask, What
people have shown so much anarchy?

Nevertheless the authorities hesitate. Let us profit by it and organize.
For us, French Socialists, our duty is simple. We do not need to impose
on our Government a policy of peace. They are practicing it. I, who have
never hesitated to bring upon my head the hatred of our patriots by my
desire to bring about a Franco-German understanding, have the right to
say that at this time the French Government desires peace.

The French Government is the best ally for peace of the English
Government, which has taken the initiative in conciliation and gives to
Russia advice of prudence and patience.

As for us, it is our duty to insist that it shall speak with force that
Russia may abstain. If unfortunately Russia does not abstain, it is our
duty to say, "We do not know of any other treaty except the one which
binds us to the human race."

This is our duty, and in expressing it we find ourselves in accord with
our German comrades who demand of their Government to see to it that
Austria moderates its acts. It is possible that the telegram of which I
spoke is due partly to that desire of the German workers. One cannot go
against the wish of four millions of enlightened consciences.

Do you know what the proletariat is? They are the men who have
collectively an affection for peace and a horror for war. The
chauvinists, the nationalists, &c., are men who have collectively an
affection for war and carnage. When they feel, however, over their heads
the menace of conflicts, or wars which may put an end to their
capitalist existence, then they remind themselves that they have friends
who seek to reduce the storm. But for the supreme masters the ground is
mined. In the drunkenness of the first battles they succeed in pulling
along the masses. In proportion as typhus completes the work of death
and misery these men will turn to the masters of Germany, France,
Russia, Austria, Italy, and so on, and will demand what reason they can
give for all those corpses. And then the revolution will tell them: Go
and demand grace from God and men.


       *       *       *       *       *




COMPOSURE IS NECESSARY.

Editorial Article for l'Humanite, Written by Jean Jaur√®s on the Night
He Was Assassinated, July 31.


If we put things at their worst, if we take, in view of the most
formidable hypothesis, the necessary precautions, let us keep the
lucidity of our spirit, the firmness of our reason. To judge from all
the common elements, it does not seem that the international situation
is desperate. To be sure, it is grave, but all chances of an amicable
adjustment have not disappeared. On one side it is evident that if
Germany had a design to attack us she would have proceeded according to
the famous sudden attack. On the contrary, she has allowed days to pass,
and France, like Russia, could have put to profit this delay, the one,
Russia, in order to proceed to a partial mobilization, the other,
France, to take precautions compatible with the maintenance of peace.

On the other hand, Austria and Russia have entered into direct
negotiations. Russia demands of Austria what treatment she reserves for
Servia. Austria answers that she will respect her "territorial
integrity." Russia figures that it is not enough and that it must also
include that "the sovereign rights of Servia are guaranteed."

Even if discord comes between the views of Austria and those of Russia,
one could measure the distance of the ideas and work on a solution of a
problem whose points are determined. It is then, it seems, that the
English idea of mediation which seeks a form, its means of expression,
but which in the end will prevail, for it embodies the profound
sentiments of the people, and without doubt the desire of the rulers
who feel rising toward them, like punishment, this peril of war, with
which for a moment they thought of playing like a diplomatic toy.

If we judge what war itself will be and the effects it will produce by
panic, sinister rumors, economic difficulties, monetary difficulties,
and the financial disasters which the mere possibility of a conflict
creates; when we think that even now we must postpone payments, and
prepare to decree a forced circulation for the paper certificates, one
asks if the most crazy or the sanest of men are capable to open such a
crisis.

The greatest danger at this time is not, if I can say it, in the events
themselves. It is not even in the real dispositions of the
chancelleries, however guilty they may be; it is not in the real will of
the people; it is in the nervousness which is gaining, in the worry
which is spread, in the sudden impulse which grows from fear, of the
growing uncertainty, prolonged anxiety. To these crazy panics the crowd
may give in, and it is not sure that the Governments, too, may give in.
They spend their time (delicious occupation) to frighten and to reassure
each other. And this, do not mistake, can last for weeks. Those who
imagine that a diplomatic crisis must be or can be settled in a few days
are mistaken. Just as the battles of modern war develop on an immense
front, last seven or eight days, the same way the diplomatic battles,
placing now in the game entire Europe and involving a number of powerful
nations, will spread necessarily over several weeks. To resist this test
one must have nerves of steel, or, better still, they need a firm
reasoning, clear and calm. It is to the intelligence of the people, it
is to their reasoning, that we must now make an appeal if we wish them
to remain masters of themselves, escape the panics, dominate the
excitement, and supervise the march of men and things, to spare the
human race from the horror of war.

The danger is great, but it is not unavoidable if we preserve clearness
of mind and a strong will, if we have both heroism of patience and
heroism of action. The clear view of our duty will give us the power to
accomplish it.

All the militant Socialist members of the Federation of the Seine are
called, for next Sunday morning, to Wagram Hall, to a meeting where the
situation will be explained, where the action which the International
expects of you will be defined.

A number of meetings will keep in action the thought and will of the
proletariat and will prepare the magnificent demonstration which will be
a prelude to the labors of the International Congress.

What counts now is the continuity of action, the constant awakening of
the reason and conscience of the workers. There lies true salvation.
There lies the guarantee of the future.


       *       *       *       *       *




PRESSURE FOR PEACE.

Resolutions of International Socialist Bureau at Brussels, July 29.


In assembly of July 29 the International Socialist Bureau has heard
declarations from representatives of all nations threatened by a world
war, describing the political situation in their respective countries.

With unanimous vote, the bureau considers it an obligation for the
workers of all nations concerned not only to continue but even to
strengthen their demonstrations against war in favor of peace and of a
settlement of the Austro-Servian conflict by arbitration.

The German and French workers will bring to bear on their Governments
the most vigorous pressure in order that Germany may secure in Austria a
moderating action, and in order that France may obtain from Russia an
undertaking that she will not engage in the conflict. On their side the
workers of Great Britain and Italy shall sustain these efforts with all
the power at their command.

The congress urgently convoked in Paris [it was never held] will be the
vigorous expression of the absolutely peaceful will of the workers of
the whole world.

It is further resolved that the International Socialist Bureau
congratulates the Russian workers on their revolutionary attitude, and
invites them to continue their heroic efforts against Czardom as being
one of the most effective guarantees against the threatened world war.


       *       *       *       *       *




HUGO HAASE AT BRUSSELS.

Speech of German Social Democratic Leader on July 30, Five Days Before
His Declaration in the Reichstag.


For twenty-five years Austria-Hungary has been attempting to strangle
Servia economically. Therefore, the ultimatum sent to Servia must be
regarded as a provocation to long desired war. As you know, Servia's
answer was so conciliatory in tone that if Austria had had the honest
desire peace could have been brought about. Austria wanted war.

The most fearful thing about it all is that this criminal sport may
deluge all Europe with blood. A telegram says that Austria does not wish
to carry on a long war with Servia, but only intends taking the capital
city, Belgrade, by way of teaching Servia a lesson. This r√¥le of the
teacher punishing the pupils is both reprehensible and dastardly.

Austria seems to count upon Germany's help. Nevertheless, the German
Socialists declare that secret negotiations have very little weight with
the proletariat. The German proletariat says that Germany is not to
involve herself, even if Russia enters in. The German capitalists, on
the other hand, demand that Germany step in because Austria makes war
with Servia. And on the same illogical, reprehensible grounds the French
capitalists are demanding war with Germany. The French proletariat is
one with the German proletariat.

The people, sunk deep in want and despair, will at last awake and
establish socialism. Yesterday thousands and tens of thousands of them
in Berlin protested against the war. Their slogan was: "Long live peace,
and down with war!"


       *       *       *       *       *




HAASE IN THE REICHSTAG.

Speech of Aug. 4--"We Do Not Desert Our Fatherland."


We are face to face with a great crisis. The consequences of the
imperialistic policy by means of which an era of competitive preparation
for war has been inaugurated, and which has served to intensify hostile
feeling between nations, have swept down over Europe like a torrent. The
responsibility lies with those who have upheld this policy; we refuse
it. [Applause from the Socialists.] Social Democracy has fought this
disastrous development with all its strength, and even up to the very
last hour, by means of prodigious public demonstrations, particularly in
close co-operation with its brothers in France, [applause from the
Socialists,] it has labored for the maintenance of peace. Its endeavors
have been in vain. We now stand before the brazen facts of actual war;
the horrors of hostile invasion threaten us. It is not for us today to
decide for or against war, but to deliberate on the problem of the
available means of national defense. We have now to think of the
millions of our fellow-countrymen who, through no fault of theirs, have
been drawn into this disaster. [Applause.] They will be the ones to
suffer most heavily from the devastation of this war.

Our warmest sympathy, accorded without reference to party, accompanies
all our brothers who have been called to the front. [Vigorous applause
from all sides of the House.] We are thinking also of the mothers who
must give up their sons, of the women and children robbed of their
mainstay and support, of those whom, to the anxiety of their loved ones,
the pangs of hunger threaten. To these will very soon be added tens of
thousands of wounded and crippled soldiers. To stand by them all, to
ease their misfortune, to alleviate their immeasurable need--this we
consider our compelling duty. [Vigorous applause.]

With a victory of the Russian despotism, which is stained with the blood
of the best of its own people, much, if not all, which concerns our
people and their future in freedom will be at stake. [Storm of
applause.]

It is necessary to ward off the danger in order to render secure the
culture and the independence of our own country. [Vigorous applause.]

Thus do we actualize what we have always claimed--in the hour of danger
we do not desert our Fatherland! [Vigorous demonstrations of approval.]

In this regard we feel ourselves in perfect accord with the
International, which has at all times recognized the right of every
people to natural independence and self-defense, just as we agree with
it in denouncing every war of conquest.

We demand that as soon as this purpose of securing national safety is
achieved, and the combatants shall be disposed toward peace, that an end
be made to the war through a peace which shall facilitate friendship
between neighboring peoples. We demand this not only in the interests of
that international solidarity for which we have continually fought, but
also in the interests of the German people. We hope that the grisly
lessons learned from suffering in this conflict will waken in new
millions of hearts the horror of war, and will win them over to the
ideal of Socialism and peace between nations.

Guided by these principles, we approve the proposed appropriations.
[Vigorous applause.]


       *       *       *       *       *




GERMAN SOCIALISTS DIVIDED.

Letter from Dr. Carl Liebknecht, Social-Democratic Member of the
Reichstag, in the Burger Zeitung, Bremen, Sept. 18.


I understand that several members of the Socialist Party have written
all sorts of things to the press with regard to the deliberations of
the Socialist Party in the Reichstag on Aug. 3 and 4.

According to these reports there were no serious differences of opinion
in our party in regard to the political situation, and our own position
and decision to assent to war credits are alleged to have been arrived
at unanimously.

In order to prevent the dissemination of an inadmissible legend I feel
it to be my duty to put on record the fact that the issues involved gave
rise to diametrically opposite views within our parliamentary party, and
these opposing views found expression with a violence hitherto unknown
in our deliberations.

It is also entirely untrue to say that assent to the war credits was
given unanimously.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: PHILIPP SCHEIDEMANN,
Chairman German Socialist Party and ex-Vice President
of the Reichstag.]




SOCIALISTS STILL GERMANS.

Letter from Philipp Scheidemann, Ex-Vice President of the Reichstag, in
the New Yorker Volkszeitung, Sept. 10.


BERLIN, Aug. 21.

----, I send you a few facts.

No one in Germany wanted this war. The fact that Germany declared war on
Russia and finally on France does not contradict this statement. If
Germany, who was exactly informed as to the preparations being made by
her neighbors, had delayed for ever so short a time, Russia would have
completed her mobilization which she had secretly been carrying on for
some time, and with her Cossacks would have swept down on our eastern
country which was only moderately well protected. And then woe to us!

That the Government, after the failure of all its efforts to maintain
peace, promptly took the initiative, disturbed not a little the Czar of
Russia. This was perhaps indicated most dramatically by his manifesto to
the Jews. This same Czar, whose hands are stained with the blood of many
thousands of the Jews whom his servants of slaughter have murdered
during the pogroms, this same Czar who has degraded and abused the Jews
in the most inhuman fashion, has now, in order to create an agreeable
impression, issued a manifesto "to my beloved Jews!" Now when he has to
fear that the Poles and those Jews living in Russian Poland may rise up
against his army of shame, now does he begin to make bright promises for
the future!

Russia to Blame.

Upon Russia rests the entire responsibility for the present war. While
the Czar was still negotiating with the German Kaiser for the declared
purpose of bringing about peace, he was arming his troops not only
against Austria but against Germany.

That France, republican France, has allied herself with Russian
absolutism for the purpose of murder and destruction, is an almost
inconceivable fact. And that England, parliamentarian England,
democratic England, is fighting side by side with the Russians for
"freedom and culture," that is a truly gigantic and shameless piece of
hypocrisy.

I do not need to place before those of our readers who are schooled in
socialism any comments on the causes of this war--the fact itself as it
stands is of a stupendous, terrifying magnitude. And it is with this
fact that we have now to reckon. Russia, France, Belgium, England,
Servia, Montenegro and Japan are now involved in this battle for
"freedom and culture," which means fighting against Germany, against the
world which has given birth to Goethe, to Kant and to Karl Marx! It
would be laughable were the situation not so desperately grave.

Socialism in each of the West European powers has done all it could to
prevent the war. Its strength could not sufficiently prevail--it was not
enough. On Aug. 1, 1914, socialism in each country found itself
confronted with the hideous certainty of war. What was to be done?

On the 1st of August there was no longer any possibility whatsoever of
sending a letter or telegram across the German frontier. The telegram of
condolence which we sent to Paris on the assassination of Jean Jaur√®s
never arrived. Socialism in each country was forced back entirely upon
itself.

At the time when I am writing this letter, Aug. 21, we in Germany know
absolutely nothing concerning the details of the action taken in the
Belgian and French Parliament. Only this much has penetrated to us, that
our comrades in all of the countries under consideration have come to
the same conclusion as we in Germany. The French have approved the war
credits, the Belgians have admitted Vandervelde to the Ministry for
Defense. That our comrades in England have come out for the strictest
neutrality is easily understood. Any other attitude on their part would
be a crime against socialism. No one would be so ignorant as to find
analogies between the situation of the German and the English
Socialists. We in Germany had to perform the duty of protecting
ourselves against Czarism, we had to accomplish the task of saving the
country in which Social Democracy has reached its highest point of
development, from impending subjection to Russia. In England the
decision had to be made only as to whether sides should be taken in the
conflict between Russia and Germany, or whether neutrality should be
preserved.

A Germany under the yoke of the Czar would have set back a century the
Socialist movement not only of Germany itself but of the whole world.

Moreover, we Social Democrats have never ceased to be Germans, because
we belong to the Socialist International. And if we in the Reichstag
have unanimously approved the war credit, we have done no more after all
than to carry out what has often been repeated by our greatest
Socialists from the Reichstag platform.

Quotes Bebel and Elder Liebknecht.

The words of Bebel and of the elder Liebknecht have always been heard
with favor in America. And what, for example, has Bebel said in this
connection?

     In the preservation of Germany's independence all the laboring
     classes, to the very least among them, are just as much concerned
     as those who consider themselves the chosen leaders and rulers of
     the people, and the working class in nowise desires to bend its
     back under any sort of foreign rule.

Still more fully did Bebel declare himself during the session of the
Reichstag of March 7, 1904. At that time he said:

     Gentlemen: You cannot in the future carry on any successful wars
     without our aid. ["Very true!" "Right!" from the Socialists.] If
     you conquer you will conquer with us and not against us; without
     our help you can no longer subsist. ["True!" "Right!" from the
     Socialists.] I will go still further, we would have the greatest
     possible interest were we to be involved in a war--a war in which
     the existence of Germany was threatened, for--and I give you my
     word for it--we are ready to the last and the oldest man among us
     to shoulder arms and protect German soil not in service to you but
     to ourselves--as far as I am concerned, in fact in defiance of you.
     ["True indeed!" "Right!" from the Socialists.]

     We live and fight on this soil, the land of our fathers, as much if
     not more our fatherland than yours, to the end that it will be a
     joy even for the last and least among us to live therein. ["Very
     good!" from the Socialists.]

     That is our endeavor and that it is which we are laboring to
     achieve, and it is for this reason that we shall repulse with all
     the power at our command and to our very last breath every attempt
     to snatch from this Fatherland one inch of land. ["Very good!" from
     the Socialists.]

There are numerous declarations of similar nature which have been
uttered by our great friend, Wilhelm Liebknecht has also spoken in
similar fashion. On the 28th of November, 1888, he addressed the
Reichstag as follows:

     What the opponents of German consolidation over there in France and
     Russia fear is a German people united for the defense of their
     land. And in this regard--that I can assure you--I have personally
     removed for our part every doubt, if any existed, among influential
     French politicians; if France attacks, straightway there is no
     party in Germany on which she can rely, and straightway every
     Socialist in Germany is pledged and prepared to march against the
     invader.

For years we have been slandered by our enemies in Germany as traitors
and worse. The imperial anti-Socialist association has had an excellent
example of this alleged treachery of ours. Our vote has stretched the
anti-Socialists in the dust, together with all the other political
vultures who have lived by slandering us.

As Socialists of firm conviction we have voted for the war credit and
moved this vote through a declaration from the party representative,
Haase. In our programme we have demanded that a volunteer army replace
the standing army. Why do we demand the volunteer army? Because we
consider it the best protection against every attack on the Fatherland.
This is it, then! We, too, wish to defend the Fatherland. Suppose that
instead we had said in the hour of need: Yes, we want to protect our
Fatherland against the knout regiments of the Czar all right enough, but
we demand that protection from the militia! Since we do not as yet have
the militia, we shall make no use of the standing army, for we would
rather let the Cossacks into the country!

From whatever side we consider the situation, we German Socialists could
not have acted otherwise than we have. A party like that of Social
Democracy, the strongest in the country, cannot avoid the facts by
hiding its head in the sand; it must act! It is no exaggeration to state
that in the present crisis the entire German people is united. That
whole nation is determined, cost what it may, to end the war as speedily
as possible, but at the same time victoriously. There is no one here who
feels any resentment toward France, and every one wishes that a worthy
peace will be established between Germany and France as soon as
possible.

England's Shameful Role.

England is playing a perfectly shameful r√¥le in this war. Even though
France were allied to Russia by an unfortunate treaty, England was not
so allied! But England, who has ever been jealous of the industrial
development of our country, used the violation of our treaty of
neutrality with Belgium, which was incurred only in dire need and which
was yielded openly and honestly in the Reichstag by the Chancellor, as a
pretext to declare war against us. And England crowned this abhorrent
action by mobilizing against us an east-Asiatic nation. Japan, whose
sons have enjoyed the most genuine and far-reaching hospitality at our
hands, whose culture has been enriched through us, who has won from us
our industrial secrets, shows herself suddenly as the most despicable,
the most treacherous nation of this whole world. I do not need to go
into details over the demands which Japan has presented to Germany, for
I assume that your readers are already in full possession of the facts.

Germany will perhaps lose a part of her colonial possessions in this
war. Germany is in no position to protect these against many enemies
during the war. Germany has steadily counted upon some colonial losses
in the struggle. We Socialists especially have in our opposition to
capitalistic colonial policy continually pointed to the fact that in the
event of war colonies cannot be retained.

For the rest, however, Germany is of good courage. No one has the
slightest doubt that our country will claim victory against the hostile
oppression from without. In the meantime you in America have long since
learned that all announcements of defeats which Germany is said to have
suffered in the east, in the west, and on the sea, are lies. It is true
that at Schirmek in Alsace a few cannon were lost by our troops. But, on
the other hand, the fact is established that in the very first days
after mobilization all the enemies' troops were completely driven from
Germany, and further, that during the mobilization of our troops
victorious battles occurred at M√ºlhausen and Lagarde in Alsace; that in
the east they have made sharp inroads on the Russians; that they
overcame L√ºttich with all its forts and captured Brussels on the 20th of
August.

Here in Germany we are expecting every moment news of the taking of
Namur. The quicker decisive battles take place, by so much sooner will
there be some possibility of establishing peace with France.

PHILIPP SCHEIDEMANN.


       *       *       *       *       *




"CRITIQUE OF WEAPONS."

Karl Kautsky, in the Neue Zeit, Berlin, Aug. 8.


_Kautsky has for over a quarter of a century been one of the foremost
Socialist leaders in Germany; the founder and present editor of the Neue
Zeit. The present article on the war appeared before the periodical was
suppressed by the Government._

War, with all its attendant horrors, has broken loose, the "Critique of
Weapons" has been set up, and the weapons of criticism are consequently
broken. This is not merely the inevitable result of the automatic
limitations which would be imposed by any state of war, but
rather--though this is but a transitory phase--because of an absolute
lack of interest in any sort of critical estimate of the whole
situation. In breathless suspense, every man is concentrating the whole
of his mental energy on the news of the next moment, news concerning
which none can make even fairly clear surmise, and about which one fact
only is known in advance, that whatever it is, it is sure to be
horrible. For relief from this wretched suspense men are looking to
dispatches and decisions of battles, not to critical speculation.

Yet by the time these lines come before the reader this stage may
already be giving way, and in all probability there will be beginning to
be felt the need of regaining our usual attitude, of taking account of
this monstrous event which has broken in on us so suddenly--so
unexpectedly that for the moment it has stunned us--of making ourselves
clear concerning the end toward which we are moving.

Of course, to discuss the chances of each or any of the combatants
involved is out of the question; indeed, it would be a difficult task
for the shrewdest military expert to establish a sound estimate, for
there are probably few, perhaps none, to whom the armies under
consideration are sufficiently well known for that. Besides all this,
moreover, the present conflict is taking place under conditions
absolutely different from any we have before known, totally new to our
experience.

Formerly, when the situation was more simple than at present, there were
always at the outbreak of war a few experienced experts who could
correctly estimate the prospects for each side in the struggle, for it
was usually fairly clear from the very beginning what each side wanted
to gain and what in the case of victory each would gain. But in the
present situation there is not a word of prophecy which can be uttered
in face of the fact that the most terrible war known to history has
broken out without any of the powers involved in the least wishing it.
It was in Russia first that at the last moment the war party seemed to
have gained the upper hand and to have set in motion the whole bloody
sport. We may rely on it that the statesmen of Austria were of the
honest belief that they could localize the conflict with Servia.

But it is impossible any longer to consider this world war as a
continuation of that conflict. Servia has vanished completely from the
horizon, and in the moment when that end disappeared from view, each
nation found itself suddenly fighting for nothing else save its own
national integrity. The real purposes in this war will not come to the
surface until the balance of the power becomes a little more sharply
defined. Then in the victors' camp all manner of purposes and desires
will suddenly spring up wide awake.

When Everything Is Over.

Meanwhile, little as may be affirmed today concerning the prospects for
the parties in this struggle and the manner of the war's conclusion,
this assertion may safely be put forth; this world will wear a vastly
different appearance when everything is over.

We hope, and may reasonably expect, that the war will be relatively
short. The Franco-Prussian war lasted from the middle of July to the end
of February; military operations began early in August and closed with
the truce of Jan. 28. That the present war will be dragged out to so
great a length, involving so incredible a number of men, demanding so
severe a straining of energies--especially the financial--on the part of
all the nations, is hardly conceivable. But however short a time it may
last, we shall emerge a world very different from before.

The time is long since past when a great war brings in its train no
changes other than the ceding of a few square miles of conquered
territory. Under the capitalistic method of production, continual
changes, irreconcilable situations, constantly new problems pile up so
rapidly that no great war is any longer possible which does not bring
with it a prolonged breaking down as well as a building up of industrial
organisms.

Especially is it clear that the non-European world will undergo a
powerful change. The non-European nations are already in the ascendency;
more and more they are becoming a strong opposition force to Europe.
Their advance must win tremendous impetus from a war which in every case
will weaken seriously the European nations, no matter how it may swing
the balance of power among them.

The United States particularly will derive the greatest profit from the
struggle. Without any exertion whatsoever she is already able to control
the entire American market, and in the Far East it is possible for her
to exercise considerable restraint on her European competitors. In time
she will be in a position to constitute herself the only great money
power of that section of the world which employs the use of free
capital. Already there is a colossal stream of European securities
flowing to the United States, who is acquiring them at the very lowest
prices. The remedy for the economic wrongs of Europe which will be
created by this war as well as the fixing of indemnities will not be
possible without the aid of America. At the very least, the conquered
nations will be wholly dependent on American capital.

Next to the United States in this amazingly swift advance stand the
nations of Asia and of Islam--Japan, China, India, Persia, Turkey with
her tributary possessions. The progress of these nations has been
considerably hampered by the control--both financial and
military--exerted over them by the European powers. In the free States
this control has been suddenly lifted; in the dependencies, such as
India, Persia, and Egypt, it has been materially weakened, and it will
be long before it can again operate with the same force. We must reckon
with the possibility of revolt among these nations and of their entrance
into the world war. Russia, England, France--these could be considerably
weakened by such a turn of affairs. Colonial policy would then show the
obverse side of the medal. It might well prove a decided source of
military and economic strength for Germany that her colonial possessions
are relatively unimportant.

World Imperialism Doomed.

The stronger the non-European nations become, the fewer grow the
possibilities for a continuation of the policy of empire. This world
war, born in the very midst of imperialism, can readily end in
circumstances which knock the supports from under the imperialistic
policy.

It may be said similarly of our worldwide preparation for war, that it
too has been a direct consequence of imperialism; and our own party has
steadily maintained that it would create an atmosphere in which powder
would finally go off of itself--a spontaneous combustion.

The burdens imposed by this war will be so terrible that from the
financial point of view it may be extremely difficult if not absolutely
impossible when peace shall at length have been concluded to add thereto
the burden of renewed preparation for war, especially in the face of
competition with America, strong and industrially intact.

These changes must inevitably give an entirely new aspect to our
external as well as to our internal political state. To what extent will
follow changes in the political relations of the different classes it is
too early yet to surmise. But here also there is every assurance for the
assertion that political life will recommence stronger than ever
before.

As soon as the "Critique of Weapons" ceases, immediately the weapons of
criticism are bound to take on a sharper edge. What forms critical
effort will assume, against what it will direct its force, what
circumstances will bring it to maturity, all of this lies in the lap of
Time. In any case, Social Democracy, like any other party, will in that
time need the full measure of its strength to assert itself and to
protect the interests of the class of which it is made up. To preserve
this strength through the vicissitudes which the future has in store is
presently to be the most important problem of our internal politics.

We must hold intact the organizations and the party organs together with
the trade unions; we must guard their members from imprudences as well
as from defection. This goes without saying and there is no true comrade
who will not act in this spirit.

No less necessary, however, is unity within the party, the absolute
relinquishing of all petty individual grievances. We are a party
committed to self-criticism, but in time of a great crisis criticism
must become mute. Never has it been more difficult, never, in fact, less
possible, to adopt and to maintain a position which would satisfy every
Socialist without exception. Every war brings Social Democracy into the
fatal dilemma between the necessity for defending our individual homes
on the one hand and, on the other, for preserving international
solidarity. The present war confronts us as well as the army staff with
particular difficulties, for it is a war possessing many faces. It is
not only a war against the Czar of Russia, but also against the
democracies of France and England, whose Governments felt themselves
forced out of fear of isolation and later subjection to stand by the
Russian Czar.

We can very easily understand how to many this or that decision by our
party may seem a false step, but it would be still more false, still
more disastrous, were we, through any difference of opinion, to allow an
internal disagreement to arise. In time of war discipline is not for
the army alone; for a party it, too, is the first requirement. Under its
rule we must all stand together, more courageous, more firmly united
than ever before. Not criticism but faith is now the essential condition
of our success.

KARL KAUTSKY.


       *       *       *       *       *




SOCIALISTS OF ITALY FIRM.

Manifesto Resenting German Mission of Herr Sudekum Issued by Socialist
Party at Rome, Sept. 3.


We are Socialists, and we do not hesitate to proclaim that the sending
of a Socialist mission from Germany to Italy at this moment cannot be
free from insidious suspicion; and as such it offends the dignity and
the independence of Italian socialism, and offends it so much more
because international socialism knows that on German Socialists depended
the lesser or greater efficacy in the action of international socialism
to arrest the provocative struggle of armaments promoted by Germany, and
thus to prevent war.

It offends it so much more because the German Socialist Party, assuming
for the justification of the aggressive policy of Germany and Austria
the same arguments as the Kaiser's diplomacy, has lost the right to
attach itself to the ties of international socialism.

We have thus far kept silent, not to disturb the neutrality proclaimed
since the outbreak of the war by the Italian people, irrevocably decided
not to dishonor themselves before the world and before history in giving
aid to Austria and Germany, and requiring peace after two years of war
in Lybia.

Today, however, we are no longer able to be silent in the presence of
German Socialist activity encouraging the obscure play of diplomatic
intrigues on the part of the Governments of the ex-Triple Alliance,
which tends to move Italian neutrality toward the tortuous and perilous
paths of indirect co-operation. We want to affirm that our wishes are
for the immediate cessation of the war without conquerors or conquered.

But if now this hope is vain, we express our desire that this infamous
war may be concluded by the defeat of those who have provoked it; the
Austrian and German Empires, since the empires of Austria and Germany
form the rampart of European reaction, even more than Russia, which is
shaken by democratic and Socialist forces, which have shown that they
know how to attempt a heroic effort of liberation; since if the German
and Austrian Empires emerge victorious from the war it will mean the
triumph of military absolutism in its most brutal expression, of a
barbarian horde massacring, devastating, destroying, and conquering in
violation of every treaty and right and law.

Nor do the German Socialists give us any confidence of knowing how to
restrain this; in the past they have only been able to realize
advantageous contrasts of labor and to attain gigantic election results
without exercising any influence in the policy of their own country.

The defeat of the German Empire may instead offer German socialism the
opportunity of emerging from its voluntary impotence and redeem itself
by breaking down the feudal political r√©gime of the empire, taking away
from Russian absolutism the assistance it has hitherto enjoyed, and
contributing to alter decisively the aims of all European policy.

Since, finally, the victory of the French Republic, now imbued with
genuine socialism, and that of England, where the truest democracy
flourishes, signifies the victory of a European political r√©gime open to
all social conquests and desiring peace, it signifies the agreement
between States at last free and nationally reinforced by the limitation
of armaments and the substitution of a system of national militia for
defense in the place of hordes professionally organized for aggression,
which would imply the liberation as well of the German people.

Therefore, under actual conditions, while nearly the whole of Europe is
at war, we may well raise our cry of horror and of protest; but our
protest strikes only those who desired the war, not those who submit to
it to defend themselves against oppression.

In this war is outlined on one side the defense of European reaction, on
the other the defense of all revolutions, past and future, brought about
by historical necessity stronger than the intentions of Governments. And
because of this we must confirm that there remains for us only one way
of being internationalists--namely, to declare ourselves loyally in
favor of whoever fights the empires of reaction, just as the Italian
Socialists residing in Paris have understood that one way only remains
to be anti-militarist--to arm and fight against the empires of
militarism.

This is our answer as Italian Socialists to the German Socialists.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: KEIR HARDIE, M.P.,
British Representative International Socialist Bureau.]




BRITISH MANIFESTO.

Issued by Keir Hardie and Arthur Henderson, July 31.


     The long-threatened European war is now upon us. For more than 100
     years no such danger has confronted civilization. It is for you to
     take full account of the desperate situation and to act promptly
     and vigorously in the interest of peace. You have never been
     consulted about the war.

     Whatever may be the rights and wrongs of the sudden, crushing
     attack made by the militarist Empire of Austria upon Servia, it is
     certain that the workers of all countries likely to be drawn into
     the conflict must strain every nerve to prevent their Governments
     from committing them to war.

     Everywhere Socialists and the organized forces of labor are taking
     this course. Everywhere vehement protests are made against the
     greed and intrigues of militarists and armament mongers.

     We call upon you to do the same here in Great Britain upon an even
     more impressive scale. Hold vast demonstrations against war in
     every industrial centre. Compel those of the governing class and
     their press who are eager to commit you to co-operate with Russian
     despotism to keep silence and respect the decision of the
     overwhelming majority of the people, who will have neither part nor
     lot in such infamy. The success of Russia at the present day would
     be a curse to the world.

     There is no time to lose. Already, by secret agreements and
     understandings, of which the democracies of the civilized world
     know only by rumor, steps are being taken which may fling us all
     into the fray.

     Workers, stand together therefore for peace! Combine and conquer
     the militarist enemy and the self-seeking imperialists today, once
     and for all.

     Men and women of Britain, you have now an unexampled opportunity of
     rendering a magnificent service to humanity and to the world!

     Proclaim that for you the days of plunder and butchery have gone
     by; send messages of peace and fraternity to your fellows who have
     less liberty than you. Down with class rule! Down with the rule of
     brute force! Down with war! Up with the peaceful rule of the
     people! (Signed on behalf of the British Section of the
     International Socialist Bureau,)

     J. KEIR HARDIE,

     ARTHUR HENDERSON.


       *       *       *       *       *




KEIR HARDIE'S QUESTIONS.

Directed at Sir Edward Grey, British Minister for Foreign Affairs, in
House of Commons, Aug. 27.


_Mr. Keir Hardie_ (Merthyr Tydvil, Lab.) asked the Secretary for Foreign
Affairs whether the suggestions for a peace settlement made by the
German Ambassador, ["White Paper," Page 66, Item No. 123,] together with
his invitation to the Foreign Secretary to put forward proposals of his
own which would be acceptable as a basis for neutrality, were submitted
to and considered by the Cabinet; and, if not, why proposals involving
such far-reaching possibilities were thus rejected.

_Sir E. Grey_ (Northumberland, Berwick)--These were personal suggestions
made by the Ambassador on Aug. 1, and without authority to alter the
conditions of neutrality proposed to us by the German Chancellor in No.
85 in the "White Paper"--Miscellaneous, No. 6, [1914.]

The Cabinet did, however, consider most carefully the next morning--that
is, Sunday, Aug. 2--the conditions on which we could remain neutral, and
came to the conclusion that respect for the neutrality of Belgium must
be one of these conditions. ["Hear, hear!"] The German Chancellor had
already been told on July 30 that we could not bargain that way.

On Monday, Aug. 3, I made a statement in the House accordingly. I had
seen the German Ambassador again at his own request on Monday, and he
urged me most strongly, though he said that he did not know the plans of
the German military authorities, not to make the neutrality of Belgium
one of our conditions when I spoke in the House. It was a day of great
pressure, for we had another Cabinet in the morning, and I had no time
to record the conversation, and therefore it does not appear in the
"White Paper"; but it was impossible to withdraw that condition [loud
cheers] without becoming a consenting party to the violation of the
treaty, and subsequently to a German attack on Belgium.

After I spoke in the House we made to the German Government the
communication described in No. 153 in the "White Paper" about the
neutrality of Belgium. Sir Edward Goschen's report of the reply to that
communication had not been received when the "White Paper" was printed
and laid. It will be laid before Parliament to complete the "White
Paper."

I have been asked why I did not refer to No. 123 in the "White Paper"
when I spoke in the House on Aug. 3. If I had referred to suggestions to
us as to conditions of neutrality I must have referred to No. 85, the
proposals made, not personally by the Ambassador, but officially by the
German Chancellor, which were so condemned by the Prime Minister
subsequently, and this would have made the case against the German
Government much stronger than I did make it in my speech. ["Hear,
hear!"] I deliberately refrained from doing that then.

Let me add this about personal suggestions made by the German
Ambassador, as distinct from communications made on behalf of his
Government. He worked for peace; but real authority at Berlin did not
rest with him and others like him, and that is one reason why our
efforts for peace failed. [Loud cheers.]

_Mr. Keir Hardie_--May I ask whether any attempt was made to open up
negotiations with Germany on the basis of suggestions here set forth by
the German Ambassador?

_Sir E. Grey_--The German Ambassador did not make any basis of
suggestions. It was the German Chancellor who made the basis of
suggestions. The German Ambassador, speaking on his own personal
initiative and without authority, asked whether we would formulate
conditions on which we would be neutral. We did go into that question,
and those conditions were stated to the House and made known to the
German Ambassador.

_Mr. Keir Hardie_ [who was received with cries of "Oh!" from all parts
of the House]--May I ask whether the German authorities at Berlin
repudiated the suggestions of their Ambassador in London, and whether
any effort at all [renewed cries of "Oh!" and "Order!"] was made to find
out how far the German Government would have agreed to the suggestions
put before them by their own Ambassador?


       *       *       *       *       *




REPLY TO MINISTER GREY.

Made by J. Ramsay Macdonald, Member of Socialist Labor Party, in House
of Commons, Aug. 4.


I would have preferred to remain silent this afternoon, but
circumstances do not permit of it. I shall model what I have to say
upon the two speeches to which we have just listened. The right
honorable gentleman has delivered a speech the echoes of which will go
down in history. However much we may resist the conclusions to which we
have come, we have not been able to resist the moving character of his
appeal ["Hear, hear!"]

I think, however, he is wrong, and I think the Government for which he
speaks is wrong. I think the verdict of history will be that they are
wrong.

The effect of the right honorable gentleman's speech in this House will
not be its final effect. There may or may not be opportunities for us to
go into details, but I want to say to the House, and without
provocation, that if the right honorable gentleman had come here today
and told us that our country was in danger, then I do not care what
party he appealed to or to what class, we would be behind him. We would
vote him what money he wants, and we would go further, for we would
offer him ourselves--if the country was in danger. [Cries of "But it
is!"] He has not persuaded me that it is, and he has not persuaded
honorable friends with me that it is.

I am perfectly certain that when the light honorable gentleman's speech
gets into cold print tomorrow he will not persuade a large section of
the country. If the nation's honor were in danger we would be with them.
There has been no crime committed by statesmen of this character without
those statesmen appealing to the nation's honor.

We went into the Crimean war because of our honor; we rushed into the
South African war because of our honor, and the right honorable
gentleman is appealing to us today because of our honor.

If the right honorable gentleman would come to us and say that a small
European nationality like Belgium is in danger [cries of "It is
invaded!"] and would assure us that he is going to confine the conflict
to that quarter, then we will support him. But what is the use of
talking about going to the aid of Belgium when you are really going
into a European war which will not leave the map of Europe as it was
before.

The right honorable gentleman said nothing about Russia. We want to know
about that and try and find out what is going to happen after this is
all over. We are not going to go blindly into this conflict without
having at least some rough idea of what is going to happen afterward.

At all events, so far as France is concerned, we can say solemnly and
definitely that no such friendship as is described by the right
honorable gentleman between one nation and another can ever justify one
of those nations going into war on behalf of the other.

If France is really in danger, if as the result of all this we are going
to have the power, civilization and genius of France removed in European
history, let the right honorable gentleman say so. It is an absolutely
impossible conception.

So far as we are concerned, whatever attacks may be made upon us,
whatever may be said about us, we will take the action that he will take
by saying that this country ought to have remained neutral [Labor
cheers] because in the deepest parts of our hearts we believe that that
was right and that that alone was consistent with the honor of the
country and the traditions of the party that are now in office.


       *       *       *       *       *




MR. MACDONALD REPENTS.

But Does Not Recant--Accusation of The London Times.


It is to be noted that while Mr. Macdonald has never withdrawn his
accusations of bad faith against the Government--while he allows them
still to be circulated as a broadsheet--he ventures to pose as having
abandoned them. Belgian neutrality was, he said in The Labour Leader,
and in effect in the House of Commons also, being used as an excuse--it
was "a pretty game of hypocrisy." But writing in The Leicester Daily
Post on Sept. 24 in vindication of his attitude he said:


     On one point I wish to be quite clear.... We could not afford,
     either from the point of view of honor or of interest, to see
     Germany occupy Belgium. The war that comes nearest having a Divine
     justification is the war in which a great and mighty State engages
     to protect a small nation. From that position I have never receded.
     In the controversies that have been raised I have doubted whether,
     when our diplomacy is judged with the whole of the facts before the
     judges, it will come well out of its trial on this point, but that
     when the popular sentiment of the country is judged it will come
     out clean and fine, so far as Belgium is concerned, I am quite
     convinced.


This is the man who charges the Government with dragging the country
into war because it would not acquiesce in the German armies marching
through Belgium on the condition that the integrity and independence of
Belgium were respected!

And will it be believed that Mr. Macdonald, whose indictment of the
Government for deliberately dragging us into an unnecessary war is still
in circulation, has actually ventured to associate himself with the
recruiting movement?

In the House of Commons on Aug. 3 Mr. Macdonald predicted that Sir
Edward Grey's statement "would not persuade a large section of the
country." That prediction having been falsified, it has been necessary
for the prophet to hedge. So when a recruiting meeting was held in
Leicester on Sept. 11, Mr. Ramsay Macdonald wrote a letter to the Mayor
expressing his regret that he could not be present, and saying:

     Victory must be ours. England is not played out. Her mission is not
     accomplished. She can, if she would, take the place of esteemed
     honor among the democracies of the world, and if peace is to come
     with healing on her wings the democracies of Europe must be her
     guardians. There should be no doubt about that.... History will in
     due time apportion the praise and the blame, but the young men of
     the country must, for the moment, settle the immediate issue of
     victory. Let them do it in the spirit of the brave men who have
     crowned our country with honor in the times that are gone....
     Should, an opportunity arise to enable me to appeal to the pure
     love of country ... I shall gladly take that opportunity. If need
     be, I shall make it for myself. I want the serious men of the trade
     union, the brotherhood, and similar movements to face their duty.
     To such men it is enough to say "England has need of you."

Thus the man who is doing his best to enfeeble sympathy abroad for his
country's cause, by representing that cause as one based on hypocrisy,
is at the same time exhorting his fellow-countrymen to make the
hypocrisy victorious!

Clearly, when the officials of the Berlin news department described Mr.
Ramsay Macdonald as "Ramsay and Macdonald" they were not so ill-informed
as at first appeared.

Though Mr. Macdonald is not two persons, he has at least two voices.


       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of New York Times Current History: The
European War from the Beginning to March 1915, Vol 1, No. 2, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW YORK TIMES CURRENT ***