*Flaws in Shaw's Logic*

By Cunninghame Graham.

Letter to The Daily News of London.


_To the Editor of The Daily News:_

The controversy between men of peace as to the merits, demerits, causes,
and possible results of the great war is becoming almost as dangerous
and little less noisy than the real conflict now being waged in and
around Ypres. The only difference between the two conflicts is that the
combatants in Flanders only strive to kill the body. Those who fire
paper bullets aim at the annihilation of the soul.

Literature is a nice thing in its way. It both passes and gives us many
weary hours. It has its place. But I submit that at present it is mere
dancing on a tight rope. Whether the war could have been avoided or not
is without interest today. In fact, there is no controversy possible
after Maximilian Harden's pronouncement. In it he throws away the
scabbard and says boldly that Germany from the first was set on war.
Hence it becomes a work of supererogation to find excuses for her, and
hence, my old friend, Bernard Shaw, penned his long indictment of his
hereditary enemy, England, all in vain.

We are a dull-witted race. Although the Continent has dubbed us
"Perfidious Albion," it is hard for us to take in general ideas, and no
man clearly sees the possibilities of the development of the original
sin that lies dormant in him. Thus it becomes hard for us to understand
the reason why, if Germany tore up a treaty three months ago we are
certain to tear up another in three years' time.

All crystal gazing appeals but little to the average man on this side of
the St. George's channel. It may be that we shall tear up many treaties,
but the broad fact remains that hitherto we have torn up none.

The particular treaty that Germany tore up was signed by five powers in
1839, ratified again in 1870 by a special clause respected by King
Frederick William in his war against the French, was often referred to
in Parliament by Gladstone and by other Ministers, and was considered
binding on its signatories. Germany tore it up for her own ends, thus
showing that she was a stupid though learned people, for she at once at
the same time prejudiced her case to the whole world and made a military
mistake.

No human motives are without alloy, but at the same time honesty in our
case has proved the better policy. Germany, no doubt, would have granted
us almost anything for our assent to her march through Belgium. We
refused her offers, no doubt from mixed motives, for every Englishman is
not an orphan archangel, stupid, or dull or muddle-headed, or what not.
The balance of the world is with us, not, perhaps, because they love us
greatly, but because they see that we, perhaps by accident, have been
forced into the right course and that all smaller nationalities such as
Montenegro, Ireland, Poland, and the rest would disappear on our defeat.

CUNNINGHAME GRAHAM.




*Editorial Comment on Shaw*

From THE NEW YORK TIMES, Nov. 5, 1914.


Mr. G. Bernard Shaw thinks that "the time has now come to pluck up
courage and begin to talk and write soberly about the war." Our readers
will find in THE TIMES Sunday Magazine this morning some of the fruits
of this auto-suggestion. They are very remarkable. While Mr. Shaw can
hardly be called a representative of any considerable class, the fact
that one prominent writer, always much read, can assume Mr. Shaw's
attitude and make public Mr. Shaw's comments throws a strong light on
the spirit of British society. It is true that he intimates that he ran
the risk of "prompt lynching" at one time, but that was probably the
suggestion of a certain timidity and vanity to which he pleads guilty.
His safe and prosperous existence is really a striking evidence, on the
one hand, of British good nature, and, on the other, of the indifferent
estimate the British put on his influence.

Like Iago, Mr. Shaw is nothing if not critical, and in this crisis his
criticism is for the most part bitter, extreme, and in purpose
destructive. He particularly dislikes Sir Edward Grey and the Government
of which he is a leading spirit, and the class which the Government
represents. He singles out Sir Edward as the chief "Junker" and among
the chief "militarists" who brought about this war. Mr. Shaw's attacks
on the Foreign Secretary are savage, and, as often happens with savage
attacks--they are far from consistent. For example, Mr. Shaw paraphrases
at some length the interview between Sir Edward and the German
Ambassador, in which the latter made four different propositions to
secure the neutrality of Great Britain if Germany waged war on France,
all of which Sir Edward refused. Mr. Shaw sees in this only evidence of
determination to take arms against Germany in any case, carrying out a
long-cherished plan formed by the Government of which Sir Edward Grey
was, for this matter, the responsible member. He does not see--- though
it is so plain that a wayfaring man though a professional satirist
should not err therein--that what the Secretary intended to do--what, in
fact, he did do--was to refuse to put a price on British perfidy, to
accept any "bargain" offered to that end.

On the other hand, Mr. Shaw paraphrases at still greater length the
report of the interview in which the Russian Foreign Minister and the
French Ambassador at St. Petersburg tried to induce the British
Government to commit itself in advance to war against Germany. Mr. Shaw
thinks that thus the German "bluff" would have been called and war would
have been prevented, and he is confident that Mr. Winston Churchill
would have taken the Bismarck tone and dictated the result. He cannot
see--what is really the essential fact in both cases--that Sir Edward
Grey was striving in every honorable way to preserve peace, that his
Government refused to stand idle and see France crushed in the same
spirit that it refused to menace Germany until a definite and undeniable
cause of war arose.

That cause came with Germany's violation of its pledge to observe the
neutrality of Belgium, and England's response excites Mr. Shaw's most
furious contempt. He adopts with zest the judgment of the German
Chancellor. The pledge for all who signed it was but a scrap of paper,
of no more binding force than others that had gone their way to dusty
death in the diplomatic waste baskets. To observe the obligation it
imposed was hypocrisy. To fight in order to compel Germany to observe it
was crass militarism. Plainly, Mr. Shaw is a little difficult. The
Government under which he lives is either too bellicose or not bellicose
enough; too ready to help France if France is attacked or not ready
enough to bully Germany, and especially it is all wrong about Belgium
and its treaty, since treaties have several times been broken, and so on
through a bewildering circle of contradictory statements and notions.

Mr. Shaw finds little to choose between the groups of combatants. He
distinctly prides himself on his impartiality, not to say indifference.
On account of his Irish birth he claims something of the detachment of a
foreigner, but admits a touch of Irish malice in taking the conceit out
of the English. Add to this his professed many-sidedness as a dramatist
and playwright and we get as good an explanation as can be given of this
noted writer's attitude toward the tremendous struggle now waging. But
Mr. Shaw's assumption of even-handed scorn for every one concerned, of
"six of one and a half dozen of the other," does not hold out. He feels
profoundly that such fighting as Germany does, for such a purpose as
inspires Germany, must be met by force, and that England could not in
the long run, no matter by whom guided or governed, have shirked the
task laid upon her. That being the case, one wonders a little why it was
worth while to cover every one with ridicule and to present a picture of
Great Britain so essentially grotesque and distorted.


       *       *       *       *       *


*Bernard Shaw on the End of the War.*

_From The New York Sun, Nov_. 15, 1914.


In the midst of a good deal of untimely gibing, George Bernard Shaw, as
reported in a London dispatch to The Sun of yesterday, says one or two
very wise and appropriate things about the end of the war and the times
to come after it. His warnings are a useful check to the current loose
talk of the fire-eaters and preachers of the gospel of vengeance.

"We and France have to live with Germany after the war," Mr. Shaw points
out. Even to embarrass her financially would be a blow to England
herself, Germany being one of England's best customers and one of her
most frequently visited neighbors. The truth of this is unanswerable.
The great object must be to effect a peace with as little rancor as
possible.

Mr. Shaw does not say it, but there are going to be overwhelming
political reasons why the pride of Germany and Austria and still more
why their military power shall not be too much impaired in case of their
defeat.

Perhaps in the final settlement the Western Allies may be found to have
more in common with Berlin than with St. Petersburg. Germany has pointed
this out with much force.

Mr. Shaw's position is not admirable when he chooses their days of
tribulation for sticking pins into his own people, even though some of
the things he says may be unpleasantly true. But it cannot be denied
that he has some sane views on the situation. The pity is that he must
always impair the force of the useful things he has to say by
flippancies, impertinences, and out-of-place girdings at those whose
courage he should help to maintain. He reminds one of a man who insists
on wrangling over the mistaken construction of a chimney while the house
is burning down.


       *       *       *       *       *


*Bernard Shaw as a Patriot.*

_From The New York World, Nov. 17, 1914._


Bernard Shaw has written for our neighbor THE TIMES an elaborate
three-page thesis to maintain:

1. That Great Britain was abundantly justified in making war with
Germany.

2. That the explanation given by the British Government for making war
against Germany was stupid, hypocritical, mendacious, and disgraceful.

3. That he alone is capable of interpreting the moral purpose of the
British people in undertaking this necessary work of civilization.

4. That the reason the British Government's justification of the war is
so inadequate is because no British Government is ever so clever as
Bernard Shaw.

5. That even in the midst of the most horrible calamity known to human
history it pays to advertise.

Various patriots have various ways of serving their country. Some go to
the firing line to be shot and others stay at home to be a source of
innocent merriment to the survivors.




*"Shaw Empty of Good Sense"*


By Christabel Pankhurst.

Written for THE NEW YORK TIMES.


His reputation for perversity and contrariety is fully maintained by
George Bernard Shaw in the ineptly-named article, "Common Sense About
the War." At home in Britain we all know that it is Mr. Shaw's habit to
oppose where he might be expected to support, and vice versa. For
example, should he speak at a prohibition meeting he would most likely
extol strong drink, or if asked to defend the sale of liquor declare
dramatically for prohibition.

He sees himself as the critic of everything and everybody--the one and
only man who knows what to do and how to do it.

Mr. Shaw charges his compatriots with intellectual laziness, but they
are not so lazy as to leave him to do their thinking for them. That he
sometimes--and oftener in the past than now--says illuminating things is
true, but firm reliance cannot be placed upon his freakish mental
processes, exemplified in his writings about the war. He has played with
effect the part of jester to the British public, but when, as now, his
jests are empty of the kernel of good sense, the matter gets beyond a
joke.

The truth is that in face of this great and tragic reality of war the
men of mere words, the literary theorists, are in danger of missing
their way. Certainly women of deeds are more likely to see things aright
than are men of words, and it is as a woman of deeds that I, a
suffragette, make answer to my irresponsible compatriot, Mr. Bernard
Shaw. And yet not a compatriot, for Mr. Shaw disclaims those feelings of
loyalty and enthusiasm for the national cause that fill the mass of us
who live under the British flag!

"Until Home Rule emerges from its present suspended animation," says Mr.
Shaw, "I shall retain my Irish capacity for criticising England with
something of the detachment of a foreigner." Now, these words are not a
little surprising, because Mr. Shaw's interest in the Home Rule cause
has hitherto been of a most restrained and well-nigh secret character,
and any one who imagines that Mr. Shaw is a strenuous campaigner for
Home Rule is greatly mistaken. If in the years preceding the war the
Horne Rule cause had depended upon Mr. Shaw's activities, it would have
been in a bad way. It is now, when a foreign enemy menaces our nation as
a whole, that Mr. Shaw manifests this enhanced interest in Home Rule.

The suffragettes, who have fought and suffered for their cause as no
living man reformer in the British Isles has fought and suffered for
his, have during the present crisis subordinated their claim to the
urgent claims of national honor and safety. So Mr. Shaw, whose
campaigning is done generally in the armchair, and never in any place
more dangerous than the rostrum, ought surely to refrain from his
frivolous, inconsistent, destructive, and unprofitable criticism of our
country.

As for the question of lynching, Mr. Shaw is, the American public may be
assured, in no danger whatever of being lynched. He is in far more
danger of having the Iron Cross conferred upon him by the Kaiser in
recognition of his attempt to supplement the activities of the official
German Press Bureau. But if he were a German subject, writing on certain
points of German policy as he does upon certain points of British
policy, his fate can well be imagined. The only retribution that will
come upon this man, who exploits the freedom of speech and pen that
England gives him, is that his words lose now and henceforth the weight
they used to have. Oh, the conceit of the man, who in this dark hour,
when the English are dying on the battlefield, writes of "taking the
conceit out of England" by a stroke of his inconsequent pen!


*Admits England's Cause Is Just.*

But with all his will to "take the conceit" out of this England, so
fiercely menaced, her sons killed, her daughters widowed--yet needing,
so he thinks, his castigation into the bargain--the critic is
constrained to admit that our country is playing the part of "the
responsible policeman of the West" and that "for England to have
refrained from hurling herself into the fray, horse, foot, and
artillery, was impossible from every point of view." Then why preface
these statements by a series of attacks upon the country which is
admitted to be justly fighting in a just cause?

The sole importance of Mr. Shaw's criticism comes from this. He
unwarrantably indorses statements made by Germany in her attempt to put
the Allies in the wrong. Because he is known to the German people by his
dramatic work, extracts from his article will be circulated among them
as an expression of the views of a representative British citizen. And
how are the Germans to know that this is false, deprived as they are of
news of what is happening in the outside world and ignorant as they must
be of Mr. Shaw's real lack of influence at this serious time?

That their traffic in mere words disables some literary men from
comprehending facts is shown by Mr. Shaw's play upon the word
"Junkerism." He points to the dictionary definition of the word instead
of to the fact it represents, and by this verbal juggling tries to
convince his readers that the military autocracy that dominates and
misdirects Germany has its counterpart and equal in Great Britain.
Whereas, the conditions in the two countries are wholly different, and
it is this very difference that Germany has regarded as one of the signs
of British inferiority.

Mr. Shaw's suggestion that the British are posing as "Injured Innocence"
and as "Mild Gazelles" is neither funny nor true. We are simply a people
defending ourselves, resisting conquest and military despotism, and
fighting for the ideal of freedom and self-government. When our country
is no longer in danger we suffragettes, if it be still necessary, are
prepared to fight on and wage our civil war that we may win freedom and
self-government for women as well as men. But, in the meantime, we
support the men--yes, and even the Government do we in a sense
support--in fighting the common enemy who menaces the freedom of men and
women alike. Although the Government in the past have erred gravely in
their dealing with the woman question, they are for the purpose of this
war the instrument of the nation.


*Facts Belie Him.*

Mr. Shaw would seem to hold Britain responsible for German militarism,
but the facts he cites are against him there. "I am old enough," says
he, "to remember the beginnings of the anti-German phase of military
propaganda in England. The Franco-Prussian war of 1870-1871 left England
very much taken aback. Up to that date nobody was much afraid that
Prussia--suddenly Prussia beat France right down in the dust."
Precisely! It was this war on France, deliberately engineered by
Bismarck, and it was the defeat and despoilment of France that fed
Germany's militarism and encouraged Germany to make those plans of
military aggression which, after long and deliberate preparation, are
being carried into effect in the present war. Germany's plans of
military aggression have compelled other countries to prepare, however
inadequately, to defend themselves.

Mr. Shaw gives support to the Germans' contention that they are not the
aggressors but are menaced by Russia. Yet he does not explain why, if
that is so, Germany took French gold and territory in 1870 and has since
continued to alienate France; nor why Germany has chosen Britain as her
enemy of enemies to be supplanted and surpassed in power.

If Germany is simply on the defensive against Russia and has no desire
to attack and cripple France and Britain, then why has she antagonized
these countries and driven one after the other into a Russian alliance?

When he affects to criticise Germany for not having "entrusted the
security of her western frontier to the public opinion of Western Europe
and to America and fought Russia, if attacked, with her rear not
otherwise defended," Mr. Shaw burkes the fact that Germany's object is
to seize Belgium and to make it part of the German Empire, also to seize
at least the northern coast of France and to make this seizure the means
of dominating Britain.

Indeed, the point at which German ambition for conquest ceases would be
hard to fix. And yet Mr. Shaw pictures for us an injured-innocent,
mild-gazelle Germany on the defensive! Quite in this picture is his
assertion that "the ultimatum to Servia was the escapade of a dotard,"
whereas, everybody knows that the ultimatum was dictated at Berlin. It
is plain as a pikestaff that in order to bring on the Great War of
conquest for which her rulers thought The Day had arrived. Germany
dictated the issue and terms of the ultimatum to Servia and then urged
Austria to refuse any compromise and arbitration which might have
averted war.

Mr. Shaw has assumed the impossible task of trying to blind the American
public to these and other facts that prove Germany to be the aggressor
in this war, but he will fail in his attempt at white-washing German
policy because it is one of the characteristics of the American people
that they have a strong feeling for reality and that no twisting and
combining of words can prevent them from getting at the facts beneath.

Bernhardi's writings are generally believed to be an inspiration, and in
part a statement of German policy. But Mr. Shaw differs. In trying to
prove that Bernhardism has nothing to do with the case, he maintains
that Germany has neglected the Bernhardi programme, and says:

"He warned Germany to make an alliance with Italy, Austria, Turkey, and
America before undertaking the subjugation of France, then of England."

Mr. Shaw then asserts that Germany disregarded this advice and allowed
herself to be caught between Russia and a Franco-British combination
with no ally save Austria. But here again facts are against him. For
Germany has followed with marvelous precision the line drawn by
Bernhardi.

She is actually fighting in partnership with Austria. She allied herself
with Italy--though Italy has refused to fight with her in this present
war of aggression. Germany has also bent Turkey to her purpose, and has
dragged the Turks into the war. An alliance with America! Well, to have
gained the help of America in crushing France and crippling England, and
ravaging and conquering Belgium was quite beyond the power of German
diplomacy and intrigue! Still Germany's attempts to win at least
America's moral support in this war are vigorous, if unsuccessful.

And with what quotable matter Mr. Shaw provides the German rulers for
the further deluding of their subjects when he writes of the German
people being "stirred to their depths by the apparent treachery and
duplicity of the attack made upon them in their extrernest peril from
France and Russia," when he writes of the Kaiser doing "all a Kaiser
could do without unbearable ignominy to induce the British not to fight
him and give him fair play with Russia," and when he writes of "taking
the Kaiser at a disadvantage." As though we ought meekly to have agreed
to the Kaiser's plan of defeating France and using her defeat as a
bridge to England and a means of conquering England! Uncommon nonsense
about the war--so we must rename Mr. Shaw's production!

And what is all this that flows from the pen of Mr. Shaw about Belgium
and "obsolete treaties," "rights of way," "necessities that know no
international law," "circumstances that alter treaties"? Made in Germany
such statements are, and yet even the Imperial German Chancellor is not
so contemptuous as Bernard Shaw is of Belgium's charter of existence,
the treaty now violated by Germany.

That is a treaty that cannot become obsolete until the powers who made
it release Belgium from the restrictions and obligations which the
treaty imposes. Germany pleads guilty in this matter of the violation of
Belgian neutrality, though Mr. Shaw attempts to show her innocent, for
the German Chancellor has said: "This is an infraction of international
law--we are compelled to overrule the legitimate protests of the
Luxemburg and Belgian Governments. We shall repair the wrong we are
doing as soon as our military aims have been achieved." And again the
Chancellor said the invasion of Belgium "is contrary to the law of
nature." To Mr. Bernard Shaw's peculiar sense of international morality
such dealing is not, however, repugnant.

*Comment by Dr. Max Walter*

To the letter addressed by Prof. Th. Niemeyer to the editor of The New
Yorker Staats-Zeitung (see No. 237, 3, 2, of Frankfurter Zeitung) I
should like to add the following remarks: During my activity as
Professor of the Methodics of Foreign Language Teaching at Teachers
College, Columbia University, New York, (January-June, 1911,) I was
introduced to Mr. Andrew Carnegie, with whom I had a long interview. He
expressed his views upon the peace question and arbitration, and spoke
for a long time about the German Emperor who had repeatedly received him
during his visits to Germany. He expressed his great appreciation of the
important services rendered by our Emperor for the maintenance of peace,
and declared that he, above all others, deserved the title of the
Peace-loving Monarch, (Friedensfürst.) To him it was chiefly due that,
during the various crises which had repeatedly brought Europe to the
brink of war, the disaster had again and again been averted. The German
Emperor, he considered, looked upon it as his chief pride that no war
should take place during his reign, that Germany should develop and
prosper in peaceful emulation with other countries, and his greatest
desire was that other nations should recognize ungrudgingly that all
Germany did to raise the moral and ethical standard of mankind was for
the benefit of all.

If now Carnegie has really declared, as this letter maintains, that he
considers the German Emperor the "Disturber of Peace," it shows clearly
how baleful the influence of the English press has been--that it could
shake such a firm conviction in our Emperor's love of peace. Let us hope
that this letter of Prof. Niemeyer's and other explanations to the same
effect will induce him to recognize the horrible misrepresentations of
English papers and to return to his former conviction.

It was on this occasion, too, that Andrew Carnegie indorsed Prof.
Burgess's view, that the three nations--America, Germany, and
England--should unite, and then they would be able to keep the peace of
the world. When I expressed my doubts in the real friendship of England,
he replied, then America and Germany, at least, must hold together to
secure universal peace. Hitherto I have refrained from publishing this
interview, but now I consider it my duty to make known the views that
Carnegie once held, and to which, if he has really changed them, we may
hope he, who has done so much in his noble striving after peace, will
return right away.

If there should remain the least doubt in Mr. Andrew Carnegie's mind, he
has only to read the telegrams exchanged between the Emperor William and
the Czar on the one hand, and King George and the Emperor on the other.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of New York Times, Current History, Vol
1, Issue 1, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW YORK TIMES, CURRENT ***